Sebastian Raschka

last updated: 23/07/2014

### Virtual Ligand Screening: Strategies, Perspectives and Limitations

A review about the current state of virtual screening (VS) approaches and software. The author provides a thorough discussion of advantages of VS, contrasts it to the alternative hight-throughput screening, and is largely focussed on the current shortcomings of VS.  
It is a nice review paper written in a rather general and introductory tone, which makes it especially worthwhile for people who are new to the field.

- Klebe, Gerhard. 2006. “Virtual Ligand Screening: Strategies, Perspectives and Limitations.” Drug Discovery Today 11 (13-14): 580–94. doi:10.1016/j.drudis.2006.05.012.

- [Link to the original article](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1359644606001784)



<hr>

- Virtual screening (VS), being a knowledge-driven, relies on available information; not only the rigid reference ligand has to be known, but also knowledge about the protein binding pocket is highly beneficial.

- among other properties, a drug-able binding site should have a surface are of ~ 75 A<sup>2</sup>

### VS challenges


##### Data:

- 3 techniques to obtain the target receptor structure:

	- most powerful method for 3D geometry inference: crystal structure analysis; depends on qualities like resolution and diffraction
	
	- NMR; depends on local distribution of the Nuclear Overhauser-Effect (NOE)
	
	- homology modeling; depends on quality and availability of protein models; shortcoming: functional binding sites are often located in loop-regions

##### Flexibility:

- problem: internal degrees of freedom of a protein and flexible regions; how to sample conformational states?

	- molecular dynamics simulation
	
	- examination of different experimental data (structures)
	
##### Protonation states:

- note: due to limited resolution, hydrogen atoms cannot be confidently detected via X-ray crystallography; thus, the correct addition of hydrogen atoms to the structures, and the assessment of protonation states has to be predicted, which is especially crucial in the ligand-binding site

- another problem is the pKa shift that is associated with the process of ligand-binding; e.g., a hydrogen-bond donor can become a hydrogen-bond acceptor and vice versa

## in progress ...